Driver API (#3564)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_porting_driver_api.rst

.. meta::

>   :description: This chapter will present CUDA driver API porting and showcase equivalent operations in HIP.

Reviewer: Present tense
```suggestion
  :description: This chapter presents how to port the CUDA driver API and showcases equivalent operations in HIP.
```

Author: Updated

  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, driver API

.. _driver_api:

*******************************************************************************
Porting CUDA driver API 
*******************************************************************************

Introduction to the CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs
================================================

> CUDA provides a separate CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:

Reviewer: Grammar. It's either
```suggestion
CUDA provides separate CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:
```
or
```suggestion
CUDA provides a separate CUDA Driver and Runtime API. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:
```

Author: Fixed

* Both APIs support events, streams, memory management, memory copy, and error handling.
* Both APIs deliver similar performance.

> * Driver APIs calls begin with the prefix ``cu`` while Runtime APIs begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API API contains ``cuEventCreate`` while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, with similar functionality.

Reviewer: Repetition
```suggestion
* Driver APIs calls begin with the prefix ``cu`` while Runtime APIs begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API contains ``cuEventCreate`` while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, with similar functionality.
```

Author: Fixed.

> * The Driver API defines a different but largely overlapping error code space than the Runtime API, and uses a different coding convention. For example, Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE`` while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Driver API defines a different, but largely overlapping, error code space than the Runtime API, and uses a different coding convention. For example, the Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE`` while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``
```

Author: Updated.

The Module features are useful in an environment which generates the code objects directly, such as a new accelerator language front-end.
Here, NVCC is not used. Instead, the environment may have a different kernel language or different compilation flow.
Other environments have many kernels and do not want them to be all loaded automatically.
The Module functions can be used to load the generated code objects and launch kernels.
As we will see below, HIP defines a Module API which provides similar explicit control over code object management.

``cuCtx`` API
-------------

The Driver API defines "Context" and "Devices" as separate entities.
Contexts contain a single device, and a device can theoretically have multiple contexts.
Each context contains a set of streams and events specific to the context.
Historically contexts also defined a unique address space for the GPU, though this may no longer be the case in Unified Memory platforms, since the CPU and all the devices in the same process share a single unified address space.
The Context APIs also provide a mechanism to switch between devices, which allowed a single CPU thread to send commands to different GPUs.

> HIP as well as a recent versions of CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this feat - for example using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HIP as well as recent versions of the CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this feat - for example using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.
```

Author: Fixed

> The CUDA Runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the APIs and has little loss of functionality since each Context can contain a single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts has been replaced with other interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CUDA Runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the APIs and has little loss of functionality since each Context can contain a single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts have been replaced with other interfaces.
```

Author: Fixed.

HIP provides a context API to facilitate easy porting from existing Driver codes.
In HIP, the ``Ctx`` functions largely provide an alternate syntax for changing the active device.

> Most new applications will prefer to use ``hipSetDevice`` or the stream APIs, therefore HIP has marked ``hipCtx`` APIs as **deprecated**. Support for these APIs may not be available in future releases. For more details on deprecated APIs please refer :doc:`reference/deprecated_api_list`.

Reviewer: Missing "the" and the reference does not render properly
```suggestion
Most new applications will prefer to use ``hipSetDevice`` or the stream APIs, therefore HIP has marked the ``hipCtx`` APIs as **deprecated**. Support for these APIs may not be available in future releases. For more details on deprecated APIs please refer :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.
```

Author: Fixed.

HIP Module and ``Ctx`` APIs
===========================

Rather than present two separate APIs, HIP extends the HIP API with new APIs for Modules and ``Ctx`` control.

``hipModule`` API
-----------------

Like the CUDA Driver API, the Module API provides additional control over how code is loaded, including options to load code from files or from in-memory pointers.

> NVCC and HIP-Clang target different architectures and use different code object formats: NVCC is ``cubin`` or ``ptx`` files, while the HIP-Clang path is the ``hsaco`` format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NVCC and HIP-Clang target different architectures and use different code object formats: NVCC supports ``cubin`` or ``ptx`` files, while the HIP-Clang path is the ``hsaco`` format.
```

Author: Fixed.

The external compilers which generate these code objects are responsible for generating and loading the correct code object for each platform.
Notably, there is not a fat binary format that can contain code for both NVCC and HIP-Clang platforms. The following table summarizes the formats used on each platform:

.. list-table:: Module formats
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Format
     - APIs
     - NVCC
     - HIP-CLANG
   * - Code Object
     - ``hipModuleLoad``, ``hipModuleLoadData``
     - ``.cubin`` or PTX text
     - ``.hsaco``
   * - Fat Binary
     - ``hipModuleLoadFatBin``
     - ``.fatbin``
     - ``.hip_fatbin``

> ``hipcc`` uses HIP-Clang or NVCC to compile host codes. Both of these may embed code objects into the final executable, and these code objects will be automatically loaded when the application starts.

Reviewer: "codes" is a very uncommon plural when used for source code
```suggestion
``hipcc`` uses HIP-Clang or NVCC to compile host code. Both of these may embed code objects into the final executable, and these code objects will be automatically loaded when the application starts.
```

Author: Fixed.

The ``hipModule`` API can be used to load additional code objects, and in this way provides an extended capability to the automatically loaded code objects.
HIP-Clang allows both of these capabilities to be used together, if desired. Of course it is possible to create a program with no kernels and thus no automatic loading.

``hipCtx`` API
--------------

HIP provides a ``Ctx`` API as a thin layer over the existing Device functions. This ``Ctx`` API can be used to set the current context, or to query properties of the device associated with the context.
The current context is implicitly used by other APIs such as ``hipStreamCreate``.

hipify translation of CUDA Driver API
-------------------------------------

> The HIPIFY tools convert CUDA Driver APIs for streams, events, modules, devices, memory management, context, profiler to the equivalent HIP driver calls. For example, ``cuEventCreate`` will be translated to ``hipEventCreate``.

Reviewer: Aren't the hip calls just the (extended) HIP runtime API calls? I'm not aware of a HIP driver API

Author: Yes, they are. 

This section refers to HIPIFY. It's a tool that converts a CUDA source code to HIP, a kind of transpiler.

Reviewer: Then this can't translate to the equivalent HIP "driver" calls, but just to the equivalent HIP calls

Reviewer 2: Removed the driver world.

HIPIFY tools also convert error codes from the Driver namespace and coding convention to the equivalent HIP error code. Thus, HIP unifies the APIs for these common functions.

The memory copy API requires additional explanation. The CUDA driver includes the memory direction in the name of the API (``cuMemcpyH2D``) while the CUDA driver API provides a single memory copy API with a parameter that specifies the direction and additionally supports a "default" direction where the runtime determines the direction automatically.
HIP provides APIs with both styles: for example, ``hipMemcpyH2D`` as well as ``hipMemcpy``.
The first flavor may be faster in some cases since they avoid host overhead to detect the different memory directions.

HIP defines a single error space, and uses camel-case for all errors (i.e. ``hipErrorInvalidValue``).

> For HIPIFY reference, visit :doc:`rocm-install-on-linux:index`.

Reviewer: The rocm install guide for linux doesn't provide information about hipify. Refer to hipifys documentation instead https://github.com/ROCm/HIPIFY
```suggestion
For further information, visit the :ref:`hipify documentation<hipify:index>`.
```

Author: Link is updated. 
An understanding section is added for Driver API.

Address Spaces
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HIP-Clang defines a process-wide address space where the CPU and all devices allocate addresses from a single unified pool.
Thus addresses may be shared between contexts, and unlike the original CUDA definition a new context does not create a new address space for the device.

Using ``hipModuleLaunchKernel``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``hipModuleLaunchKernel`` is ``cuLaunchKernel`` in HIP world. It takes the same arguments as ``cuLaunchKernel``.

Additional Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> * HIP-Clang creates a primary context when the HIP API is called. So in a pure driver API code, HIP-Clang will create a primary context while HIP/NVCC will have empty context stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* HIP-Clang creates a primary context when the HIP API is called. So in a pure driver API code, HIP-Clang will create a primary context while HIP/NVCC will have an empty context stack.
```

Author: Fixed.

> HIP-Clang will push primary context to context stack when it is empty. This can have subtle differences on applications which mix the runtime and driver APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang will push primary context to the context stack when it is empty. This can have subtle differences on applications which mix the runtime and driver APIs.
```

Author: Fixed.

Reviewer: This one actually slipped through and hasn't been fixed

Reviewer 2: Fixed.

Initialization and Termination Functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

hip-clang generates initialization and termination functions for each translation unit for host code compilation. The initialization functions call ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` to register the fatbinary embedded in the ELF file. They also call ``__hipRegisterFunction`` and ``__hipRegisterVar`` to register kernel functions and device side global variables. The termination functions call ``__hipUnregisterFatBinary``.
hip-clang emits a global variable ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` of ``void**`` type with ``linkonce`` linkage and initial value 0 for each host translation unit. Each initialization function checks ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` and register the fatbinary only if ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` is 0 and saves the return value of ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` to ``__hip_gpubin_handle``. This is to guarantee that the fatbinary is only registered once. Similar check is done in the termination functions.

Kernel Launching
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> hip-clang supports kernel launching by CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax, ``hipLaunchKernelGGL``. The latter one is macro which expand to CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax.

Reviewer: I think this should also mention `hipLaunchKernel`. Usually this is not recommended afaik, but since this is the driver API porting guide I think it should be mentioned for completeness' sake.
```suggestion
hip-clang supports kernel launching via the CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax, ``hipLaunchKernel`` or ``hipLaunchKernelGGL``. The latter one is a macro which expands to the CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax by default, or can be turned into a template by defining ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH``.
```

Author: Updated.

When the executable or shared library is loaded by the dynamic linker, the initialization functions are called. In the initialization functions, when ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` is called, the code objects containing all kernels are loaded; when ``__hipRegisterFunction`` is called, the stub functions are associated with the corresponding kernels in code objects.

hip-clang implements two sets of kernel launching APIs.

> By default, in the host code, for the ``<<<>>>`` statement, hip-clang first emits call of ``hipConfigureCall`` to set up the threads and grids, then emits call of the stub function with the given arguments. In the stub function, ``hipSetupArgument`` is called for each kernel argument, then ``hipLaunchByPtr`` is called with a function pointer to the stub function. In ``hipLaunchByPtr``, the real kernel associated with the stub function is launched.

Reviewer: Wording
```suggestion
By default, in the host code, for the ``<<<>>>`` statement, hip-clang first calls ``hipConfigureCall`` to set up the threads and grids, then calls the stub function with the given arguments. In the stub function, ``hipSetupArgument`` is called for each kernel argument, then ``hipLaunchByPtr`` is called with a function pointer to the stub function. In ``hipLaunchByPtr``, the real kernel associated with the stub function is launched.
```

Author: Updated

NVCC Implementation Notes
-------------------------

Inter-operation between HIP and CUDA Driver
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

CUDA applications may want to mix CUDA driver code with HIP code (see example below). This table shows the type equivalence to enable this interaction.

.. list-table:: Equivalence table between HIP and CUDA types
   :header-rows: 1

   * - HIP Type
     - CU Driver Type
     - CUDA Runtime Type
   * - ``hipModule_t``
     - ``CUmodule``
     - 
   * - ``hipFunction_t``
     - ``CUfunction``
     - 
   * - ``hipCtx_t``
     - ``CUcontext``
     - 
   * - ``hipDevice_t``
     - ``CUdevice``
     - 
   * - ``hipStream_t``
     - ``CUstream``
     - ``cudaStream_t``
   * - ``hipEvent_t``
     - ``CUevent``
     - ``cudaEvent_t``
   * - ``hipArray``
     - ``CUarray``
     - ``cudaArray``

Compilation Options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``hipModule_t`` interface does not support ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` function, which is used to control PTX compilation options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``hipModule_t`` interface does not support the ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` function, which is used to control PTX compilation options.
```

Author: Fixed.

HIP-Clang does not use PTX and does not support these compilation options.

> In fact, HIP-Clang code objects always contain fully compiled ISA and do not require additional compilation as a part of the load step.

Reviewer: The ISA is just the general model describing, among others, the actual instruction set.
```suggestion
In fact, HIP-Clang code objects always contain fully compiled code for a devices specific instruction set and do not require additional compilation as a part of the load step.
```

Author: Fixed.

> The corresponding HIP function ``hipModuleLoadDataEx`` behaves as ``hipModuleLoadData`` on HIP-Clang path (compilation options are not used) and as ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` on NVCC path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The corresponding HIP function ``hipModuleLoadDataEx`` behaves as ``hipModuleLoadData`` on the HIP-Clang path (compilation options are not used) and as ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` on the NVCC path.
```

Author: Fixed.

            // options will not be used, and cupModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr,
            // numOptions, options, optionValues) will be called on NVCC path
            hipModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr, numOptions, options, optionValues);

            hipFunction_t k;
            hipModuleGetFunction(&k, module, "myKernel");

    .. tab-item:: CUDA

        .. code-block:: cpp

            CUmodule module;
            void *imagePtr = ...; // Somehow populate data pointer with code object

            const int numOptions = 1;
            CUJit_option options[numOptions];
            void *optionValues[numOptions];

            options[0] = CU_JIT_MAX_REGISTERS;
            unsigned maxRegs = 15;
            optionValues[0] = (void *)(&maxRegs);

            cuModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr, numOptions, options, optionValues);

            CUfunction k;
            cuModuleGetFunction(&k, module, "myKernel");

The below sample shows how to use ``hipModuleGetFunction``.

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include <fstream>
    #include <hip_runtime.h>
    #include <hip_runtime_api.h>
    #include <iostream>

>     #include <vector>

Reviewer: When sorting libraries by name, then also separate standard libraries from project specific ones
```suggestion
    #include <hip_runtime.h>
    #include <hip_runtime_api.h>

    #include <fstream>
    #include <iostream>
    #include <vector>
```

Author: updated

    #define LEN 64
    #define SIZE LEN << 2

    #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__
    #define fileName "vcpy_isa.co"
    #endif

    #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
    #define fileName "vcpy_isa.ptx"
    #endif

    #define kernel_name "hello_world"

    int main() {
        float *A, *B;
        hipDeviceptr_t Ad, Bd;
        A = new float[LEN];

>         B = new float[LEN];

Reviewer: This code uses a weird mixture of C and C++. It would be better to be more consistent and use C++. Especially as `std::vector` is already used later on in this code

Author: Further discussion is required. 
Tbh the recent code has a better performance.  `new` operator does not exist in C.

Reviewer: If the performance is that much better, I'd like to have actual benchmarks to support that claim. But this is definitely overkill - this is example code to showcase how to use the HIP API. The performance of host-side allocations are of no concern to this. I think it's more important to have concise and consistent code, that can easily be adapted by users

Getting back to the point: It's not only the use of raw host-side pointers, but also defines and c-style casts. I think that whole code could use a refactor, Adding comments about what the kernels are supposed to do would also be helpful, as their code is not included (and wouldn't be very readable anyways)

        hipCtxCreate(&context, 0, device);
        #endif

        hipMalloc((void **)&Ad, SIZE);
        hipMalloc((void **)&Bd, SIZE);

        hipMemcpyHtoD(Ad, A, SIZE);
        hipMemcpyHtoD(Bd, B, SIZE);
        hipModule_t Module;
        hipFunction_t Function;
        hipModuleLoad(&Module, fileName);
        hipModuleGetFunction(&Function, Module, kernel_name);

        std::vector<void *> argBuffer(2);
        memcpy(&argBuffer[0], &Ad, sizeof(void *));
        memcpy(&argBuffer[1], &Bd, sizeof(void *));

        size_t size = argBuffer.size() * sizeof(void *);

        void *config[] = {HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_POINTER, &argBuffer[0],
                            HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_SIZE, &size, HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_END};

        hipModuleLaunchKernel(Function, 1, 1, 1, LEN, 1, 1, 0, 0, NULL,
                                (void **)&config);

        hipMemcpyDtoH(B, Bd, SIZE);
        for (uint32_t i = 0; i < LEN; i++) {
            std::cout << A[i] << " - " << B[i] << std::endl;
        }

        #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
        hipCtxDetach(context);
        #endif

        return 0;
    }

HIP Module and Texture Driver API
=================================

> HIP supports texture driver APIs however texture reference should be declared in host scope. Following code explains the use of texture reference for ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HIP supports texture driver APIs, however texture references should be declared in host scope. Following code explains the use of texture references for ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.
```

Author: - I'm not sure whether it's countable in this case. 
- There is no comma in front of `however` in this case.

Reviewer: - it is countable, as there can be several distinct references
- `however` is used as a conjunctive adverb here. Actually, it's also missing a comma after "however". The sentence could as well be split up:
```suggestion
HIP supports texture driver APIs. However, texture reference should be declared in host scope. Following code explains the use of texture reference for ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed.

Reviewer: "references" is still singular. That's the one that annoys me more than the missing comma :D

Author: Updated.

  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, driver API

.. _porting_driver_api:

*******************************************************************************
Porting CUDA driver API 
*******************************************************************************

NVIDIA provides separate CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:

* Both APIs support events, streams, memory management, memory copy, and error handling.
* Both APIs deliver similar performance.
* Driver API calls begin with the prefix ``cu``, while Runtime API calls begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API contains ``cuEventCreate``, while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, which has similar functionality.
* The Driver API defines a different, but largely overlapping, error code space than the Runtime API and uses a different coding convention. For example, the Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE``, while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``.

The Driver API offers two additional functionalities not provided by the Runtime API: ``cuModule`` and ``cuCtx`` APIs.

cuModule API
------------

> The Module section of the Driver API provides additional control over how and when accelerator code objects are loaded. For example, the driver API enables code objects to load from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or global data are extracted from the loaded code objects. In contrast, the Runtime API loads automatically and, if necessary, compiles all the kernels from an executable binary when it runs. In this mode, kernel code must be compiled using NVCC so that automatic loading can function correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Module section of the Driver API provides additional control over how and when accelerator code objects are loaded. For example, the Driver API enables code objects to load from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or global data are extracted from the loaded code objects. In contrast, the Runtime API loads automatically and, if necessary, compiles all the kernels from an executable binary when it runs. In this mode, kernel code must be compiled using NVCC so that automatic loading can function correctly.
```

Author: Fixed.

.. list-table:: Module formats
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Format
     - APIs
     - NVCC
     - HIP-CLANG
   * - Code object
     - ``hipModuleLoad``, ``hipModuleLoadData``
     - ``.cubin`` or PTX text
     - ``.hsaco``
   * - Fat binary
     - ``hipModuleLoadFatBin``
     - ``.fatbin``
     - ``.hip_fatbin``

``hipcc`` uses HIP-Clang or NVCC to compile host code. Both of these compilers can embed code objects into the final executable. These code objects are automatically loaded when the application starts.
The ``hipModule`` API can be used to load additional code objects. When used this way, it extends the capability of the automatically loaded code objects.
HIP-Clang enables both of these capabilities to be used together. Of course, it is possible to create a program with no kernels and no automatic loading.

hipCtx API
----------

HIP provides a ``Ctx`` API as a thin layer over the existing device functions. The ``Ctx`` API can be used to set the current context or to query properties of the device associated with the context.
The current context is implicitly used by other APIs, such as ``hipStreamCreate``.

> HIPIFY translation of CUDA Driver API

Reviewer 3: There's a bit of inconsistency with the capitalization of Driver here and throughout the document. If "CUDA Driver" is the official name of the driver, capitalize Driver. Otherwise, it should be lower case. The main thing is to be consistent.

Author: I modified all to lowercase (CUDA driver API), hence "CUDA Driver' is not the name of the driver.
I also updated "Runtime API" to "runtime API" for CUDA related cases.

------
CUDA is a bit confusing with wordings:

Here it's capitalized:
https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-driver-api/index.html
https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#driver-api

On the other hand, in the rest of the programming guide, it's written as CUDA driver API.

It's similar for "runtime API"

-------------------------------------

The HIPIFY tools convert CUDA Driver APIs for streams, events, modules, devices, memory management, context, and the profiler to the equivalent HIP calls. For example, ``cuEventCreate`` is translated to ``hipEventCreate``.

> HIPIFY tools also convert error codes from the Driver namespace and coding conventions to the equivalent HIP error code. HIP unifies the APIs for these common functions.

Reviewer 3: I'm also not sure if Driver should be capitalized here. If it's the actual name of the namespace in the code, capitalize it.

Author: I agree, thanks for the catch! Updated.

The memory copy API requires additional explanation. The CUDA driver includes the memory direction in the name of the API (``cuMemcpyH2D``), while the CUDA driver API provides a single memory copy API with a parameter that specifies the direction. It also supports a "default" direction where the runtime determines the direction automatically.
HIP provides APIs with both styles, for example, ``hipMemcpyH2D`` as well as ``hipMemcpy``.

> The first version might be faster in some cases since it avoids any host overhead to detect the different memory directions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first version might be faster in some cases because it avoids any host overhead to detect the different memory directions.
```

Author: Updated

HIP defines a single error space and uses camel case for all errors (i.e. ``hipErrorInvalidValue``).

For further information, visit the :doc:`hipify:index`.

**Address spaces**

HIP-Clang defines a process-wide address space where the CPU and all devices allocate addresses from a single unified pool.
This means addresses can be shared between contexts. Unlike the original CUDA implementation, a new context does not create a new address space for the device.

**Using hipModuleLaunchKernel**

Both CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs define a function for launching kernels, called ``cuLaunchKernel`` or ``cudaLaunchKernel``. The equivalent API in HIP is ``hipModuleLaunchKernel``.
The kernel arguments and the execution configuration (grid dimensions, group dimensions, dynamic shared memory, and stream) are passed as arguments to the launch function.

> The Runtime additionally provides the ``<<< >>>`` syntax for launching kernels, which resembles a special function call and is easier to use than explicit launch API, in particular with respect to handling of kernel arguments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Runtime API additionally provides the ``<<< >>>`` syntax for launching kernels, which resembles a special function call and is easier to use than the explicit launch API, especially when handling kernel arguments.
```

Author: Updated

When the executable or shared library is loaded by the dynamic linker, the initialization functions are called. In the initialization functions, the code objects containing all kernels are loaded when ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` is called. When ``__hipRegisterFunction`` is called, the stub functions are associated with the corresponding kernels in the code objects.

HIP-Clang implements two sets of APIs for launching kernels.
By default, when HIP-Clang encounters the ``<<<>>>`` statement in the host code, it first calls ``hipConfigureCall`` to set up the threads and grids. It then calls the stub function with the given arguments. The stub function calls ``hipSetupArgument`` for each kernel argument, then calls ``hipLaunchByPtr`` with a function pointer to the stub function. In ``hipLaunchByPtr``, the real kernel associated with the stub function is launched.

NVCC implementation notes
-------------------------

> **Inter-operation between HIP and CUDA Driver**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Interoperation between HIP and CUDA Driver**
```

Author: Updated

        hipCtxCreate(&context, 0, device);
        #endif

        hipMalloc((void **)&Ad, SIZE);
        hipMalloc((void **)&Bd, SIZE);

        hipMemcpyHtoD(Ad, A, SIZE);
        hipMemcpyHtoD(Bd, B, SIZE);
        hipModule_t Module;
        hipFunction_t Function;
        hipModuleLoad(&Module, fileName);
        hipModuleGetFunction(&Function, Module, kernel_name);

        std::vector<void *> argBuffer(2);
        memcpy(&argBuffer[0], &Ad, sizeof(void *));
        memcpy(&argBuffer[1], &Bd, sizeof(void *));

        size_t size = argBuffer.size() * sizeof(void *);

        void *config[] = {HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_POINTER, &argBuffer[0],
                            HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_SIZE, &size, HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_END};

        hipModuleLaunchKernel(Function, 1, 1, 1, LEN, 1, 1, 0, 0, NULL,
                                (void **)&config);

        hipMemcpyDtoH(B, Bd, SIZE);
        for (uint32_t i = 0; i < LEN; i++) {
            std::cout << A[i] << " - " << B[i] << std::endl;
        }

        #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
        hipCtxDetach(context);
        #endif

        return 0;
    }

HIP module and texture Driver API
=================================

> HIP supports texture driver APIs. However, texture references should be declared within the host scope. The following code demonstrates the use of texture references for the ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.

Reviewer 3: Is it mandatory to declare the references in the host scope? If so, use "must" instead of "should".

Author: According to my best knowledge, yes. Thanks! Updated

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter presents how to port the CUDA driver API and showcases equivalent operations in HIP.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, driver API

.. _porting_driver_api:

*******************************************************************************
Porting CUDA driver API 
*******************************************************************************

NVIDIA provides separate CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:

* Both APIs support events, streams, memory management, memory copy, and error handling.
* Both APIs deliver similar performance.

> * Driver API calls begin with the prefix ``cu`` while Runtime API calls begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API contains ``cuEventCreate`` while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, with similar functionality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Driver API calls begin with the prefix ``cu``, while Runtime API calls begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API contains ``cuEventCreate``, while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, which has similar functionality.
```

> * The Driver API defines a different, but largely overlapping, error code space than the Runtime API and uses a different coding convention. For example, the Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE`` while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Driver API defines a different, but largely overlapping, error code space than the Runtime API and uses a different coding convention. For example, the Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE``, while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``.
```

Author: Updated

The Driver API offers two additional functionalities not provided by the Runtime API: ``cuModule`` and ``cuCtx`` APIs.

``cuModule`` API
----------------

> The Module section of the Driver API provides additional control over how and when accelerator code objects are loaded. For example, the driver API allows code objects to load from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or global data are extracted from the loaded code objects. In contrast, the Runtime API loads automatically and compiles all the kernels from an executable binary when run, if necessary. In this mode, kernel code must be compiled using NVCC so that the automatic loading functions correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Module section of the Driver API provides additional control over how and when accelerator code objects are loaded. For example, the driver API enables code objects to load from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or global data are extracted from the loaded code objects. In contrast, the Runtime API loads automatically and, if necessary, compiles all the kernels from an executable binary when it runs. In this mode, kernel code must be compiled using NVCC so that automatic loading can function correctly.
```

Author: Updated

> The Module features are useful in an environment that generates the code objects directly, such as a new accelerator language front-end. Here, NVCC is not used. Instead, the environment might have a different kernel language or compilation flow. Other environments have many kernels and don't want all of them to be loaded automatically. The Module functions load the generated code objects and launch kernels. Similar to the cuModule API, HIP defines hipModule API that provides similar explicit control over code object management.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Module features are useful in an environment that generates the code objects directly, such as a new accelerator language front end. NVCC is not used here. Instead, the environment might have a different kernel language or compilation flow. Other environments have many kernels and don't want all of them to be loaded automatically. The Module functions load the generated code objects and launch kernels. Similar to the cuModule API, HIP defines a hipModule API that provides similar explicit control over code object management.
```

Author: Updated

Initialization and Termination Functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

hip-clang generates initialization and termination functions for each translation unit for host code compilation. The initialization functions call ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` to register the fatbinary embedded in the ELF file. They also call ``__hipRegisterFunction`` and ``__hipRegisterVar`` to register kernel functions and device side global variables. The termination functions call ``__hipUnregisterFatBinary``.
hip-clang emits a global variable ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` of ``void**`` type with ``linkonce`` linkage and initial value 0 for each host translation unit. Each initialization function checks ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` and register the fatbinary only if ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` is 0 and saves the return value of ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` to ``__hip_gpubin_handle``. This is to guarantee that the fatbinary is only registered once. Similar check is done in the termination functions.

Kernel Launching
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> hip-clang supports kernel launching via the CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax, ``hipLaunchKernel`` or ``hipLaunchKernelGGL``. The latter one is a macro which expands to the CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax by default, or can be turned into a template by defining ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang supports kernel launching using either the CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax, ``hipLaunchKernel``, or ``hipLaunchKernelGGL``. The last option is a macro which expands to the CUDA ``<<<>>>`` syntax by default. It can also be turned into a template by defining ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH``.
```

Author: Updated

> When the executable or shared library is loaded by the dynamic linker, the initialization functions are called. In the initialization functions, when ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` is called, the code objects containing all kernels are loaded; when ``__hipRegisterFunction`` is called, the stub functions are associated with the corresponding kernels in code objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the executable or shared library is loaded by the dynamic linker, the initialization functions are called. In the initialization functions, the code objects containing all kernels are loaded when ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` is called. When ``__hipRegisterFunction`` is called, the stub functions are associated with the corresponding kernels in the code objects.
```

Author: Updated

> hip-clang implements two sets of kernel launching APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang implements two sets of APIs for launching kernels.
```

Author: Updated

> 

Reviewer 3: Probably just delete this line to make the single sentence above part of the paragraph below ( "HIP-Clang implements two sets of APIs for launching kernels" should not be a single-sentence paragraph).

Author: Yes, you are right. Updated.

> By default, in the host code, for the ``<<<>>>`` statement, hip-clang first calls ``hipConfigureCall`` to set up the threads and grids, then calls the stub function with the given arguments. In the stub function, ``hipSetupArgument`` is called for each kernel argument, then ``hipLaunchByPtr`` is called with a function pointer to the stub function. In ``hipLaunchByPtr``, the real kernel associated with the stub function is launched.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, when HIP-Clang encounters the ``<<<>>>`` statement in the host code, it first calls ``hipConfigureCall`` to set up the threads and grids. It then calls the stub function with the given arguments. The stub function calls ``hipSetupArgument`` for each kernel argument, then calls ``hipLaunchByPtr`` with a function pointer to the stub function. In ``hipLaunchByPtr``, the real kernel associated with the stub function is launched.
```

> NVCC Implementation Notes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NVCC implementation notes
```

-------------------------

Inter-operation between HIP and CUDA Driver
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> CUDA applications may want to mix CUDA driver code with HIP code (see example below). This table shows the type equivalence to enable this interaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CUDA applications might want to mix CUDA driver code with HIP code (see the example below). This table shows the equivalence between CUDA and HIP types required to implement this interaction.
```

.. list-table:: Equivalence table between HIP and CUDA types
   :header-rows: 1

   * - HIP Type
     - CU Driver Type

>      - CUDA Runtime Type

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * - HIP type
     - CU Driver type
     - CUDA Runtime type
```

   * - ``hipModule_t``
     - ``CUmodule``
     - 
   * - ``hipFunction_t``
     - ``CUfunction``
     - 
   * - ``hipCtx_t``
     - ``CUcontext``
     - 
   * - ``hipDevice_t``
     - ``CUdevice``
     - 
   * - ``hipStream_t``
     - ``CUstream``
     - ``cudaStream_t``
   * - ``hipEvent_t``
     - ``CUevent``
     - ``cudaEvent_t``
   * - ``hipArray``
     - ``CUarray``
     - ``cudaArray``

> Compilation Options

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Compilation options
```

Reviewer 3: Heading is missing from the preview

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``hipModule_t`` interface does not support the ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` function, which is used to control PTX compilation options.

> HIP-Clang does not use PTX and does not support these compilation options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang does not use PTX, so it does not support these compilation options.
```

Author: Updated

> In fact, HIP-Clang code objects always contain fully compiled code for a devices specific instruction set and do not require additional compilation as a part of the load step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In fact, HIP-Clang code objects always contain fully compiled code for a device-specific instruction set and do not require additional compilation as a part of the load step.
```

> The corresponding HIP function ``hipModuleLoadDataEx`` behaves as ``hipModuleLoadData`` on the HIP-Clang path (compilation options are not used) and as ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` on the NVCC path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The corresponding HIP function ``hipModuleLoadDataEx`` behaves like ``hipModuleLoadData`` on the HIP-Clang path (where compilation options are not used) and like ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` on the NVCC path.
```

Author: Updated

            options[0] = hipJitOptionMaxRegisters;
            unsigned maxRegs = 15;
            optionValues[0] = (void *)(&maxRegs);

            // hipModuleLoadData(module, imagePtr) will be called on HIP-Clang path, JIT
            // options will not be used, and cupModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr,
            // numOptions, options, optionValues) will be called on NVCC path
            hipModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr, numOptions, options, optionValues);

            hipFunction_t k;
            hipModuleGetFunction(&k, module, "myKernel");

    .. tab-item:: CUDA

        .. code-block:: cpp

            CUmodule module;
            void *imagePtr = ...; // Somehow populate data pointer with code object

            const int numOptions = 1;
            CUJit_option options[numOptions];
            void *optionValues[numOptions];

            options[0] = CU_JIT_MAX_REGISTERS;
            unsigned maxRegs = 15;
            optionValues[0] = (void *)(&maxRegs);

            cuModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr, numOptions, options, optionValues);

            CUfunction k;
            cuModuleGetFunction(&k, module, "myKernel");

> The below sample shows how to use ``hipModuleGetFunction``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The sample below shows how to use ``hipModuleGetFunction``.
```

Author: Updated

        hipCtx_t context;
        hipDeviceGet(&device, 0);
        hipCtxCreate(&context, 0, device);
        #endif

        hipMalloc((void **)&Ad, SIZE);
        hipMalloc((void **)&Bd, SIZE);

        hipMemcpyHtoD(Ad, A, SIZE);
        hipMemcpyHtoD(Bd, B, SIZE);
        hipModule_t Module;
        hipFunction_t Function;
        hipModuleLoad(&Module, fileName);
        hipModuleGetFunction(&Function, Module, kernel_name);

        std::vector<void *> argBuffer(2);
        memcpy(&argBuffer[0], &Ad, sizeof(void *));
        memcpy(&argBuffer[1], &Bd, sizeof(void *));

        size_t size = argBuffer.size() * sizeof(void *);

        void *config[] = {HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_POINTER, &argBuffer[0],
                            HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_SIZE, &size, HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_END};

        hipModuleLaunchKernel(Function, 1, 1, 1, LEN, 1, 1, 0, 0, NULL,
                                (void **)&config);

        hipMemcpyDtoH(B, Bd, SIZE);
        for (uint32_t i = 0; i < LEN; i++) {
            std::cout << A[i] << " - " << B[i] << std::endl;
        }

        #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
        hipCtxDetach(context);
        #endif

        return 0;
    }

> HIP Module and Texture Driver API

Reviewer 3: Are "Module" and "Texture Driver" the proper name of APIs. If so, they should be capitalized. Otherwise, use sentence case and don't capitalize).

Author: Thanks! Fixed.

=================================

> HIP supports texture driver APIs. However texture reference should be declared in host scope. Following code explains the use of texture reference for ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP supports texture driver APIs. However, texture references should be declared within the host scope. The following code demonstrates the use of texture references for the ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.
```

    __global__ void tex2dKernel(hipLaunchParm lp, float *outputData, int width,
                                int height) {
        int x = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;
        int y = blockIdx.y * blockDim.y + threadIdx.y;
        outputData[y * width + x] = tex2D(tex, x, y);
    }

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Host code:

  texture<float, 2, hipReadModeElementType> tex;

    void myFunc ()
    {
        // ...

        textureReference* texref;
        hipModuleGetTexRef(&texref, Module1, "tex");
        hipTexRefSetAddressMode(texref, 0, hipAddressModeWrap);
        hipTexRefSetAddressMode(texref, 1, hipAddressModeWrap);
        hipTexRefSetFilterMode(texref, hipFilterModePoint);
        hipTexRefSetFlags(texref, 0);
        hipTexRefSetFormat(texref, HIP_AD_FORMAT_FLOAT, 1);
        hipTexRefSetArray(texref, array, HIP_TRSA_OVERRIDE_FORMAT);

      // ...
    }

Driver Entry Point Access
=========================

Starting from HIP version 6.2.0, support for Driver Entry Point Access is available when using CUDA 12.0 or newer. This feature allows developers to directly interact with the CUDA driver API, providing more control over GPU operations. 

> Driver Entry Point Access provides several opportunities:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Driver Entry Point Access provides several features:
```

Author: Updated

* Retrieving the address of a runtime function

> * Requesting per-thread default stream version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Requesting the default stream version on a per-thread basis
```

Author: Updated

* Accessing new HIP features on older toolkits with a newer driver

Address retrieval
-----------------

> The function ``hipGetProcAddress`` can be used to obtain the address of a runtime function. This is demonstrated in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``hipGetProcAddress`` function can be used to obtain the address of a runtime function. This is demonstrated in the following example:
```

Author: Updated

      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to initialize HIP runtime." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Get the per-thread default stream
      hipStream_t stream = hipStreamPerThread;

      // Use the stream for some operation
      // For example, allocate memory on the device
      void* d_ptr;
      size_t size = 1024;
      res = hipMalloc(&d_ptr, size);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to allocate memory." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Perform some operation using the stream
      // For example, set memory on the device
      res = hipMemsetAsync(d_ptr, 0, size, stream);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to set memory." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Synchronize the stream
      res = hipStreamSynchronize(stream);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to synchronize stream." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      std::cout << "Operation completed successfully using per-thread default stream." << std::endl;

      // Free the allocated memory
      hipFree(d_ptr);

      return 0;
  }

> Access to new HIP features with a newer driver

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Accessing new HIP features with a newer driver
```

Author: Updated

----------------------------------------------

> HIP is designed with forward compatibility, allowing newer features to be utilized with older toolkits, provided a compatible driver is present. Feature support can be verified through runtime API functions and version checks. This approach ensures that applications can benefit from new features and improvements in the HIP runtime without the need for recompilation with a newer toolkit. The function ``hipGetProcAddress`` enables dynamic querying and usage of newer functions offered by the HIP runtime, even if the application was built with an older toolkit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP is designed to be forward compatible, allowing newer features to be utilized with older toolkits, provided a compatible driver is present. Feature support can be verified through runtime API functions and version checks. This approach ensures that applications can benefit from new features and improvements in the HIP runtime without needing to be recompiled with a newer toolkit. The function ``hipGetProcAddress`` enables dynamic querying and the use of newer functions offered by the HIP runtime, even if the application was built with an older toolkit.
```

Author: Updated.

> An example is provided for a hypothetic ``foo()`` function. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example is provided for a hypothetical ``foo()`` function. 
```

Author: Updated.

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter presents how to port the CUDA driver API and showcases equivalent operations in HIP.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, driver API

.. _porting_driver_api:

*******************************************************************************
Porting CUDA driver API 
*******************************************************************************

> Introduction to the CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs
> ================================================

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

Author: Removed.

> CUDA provides separate CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NVIDIA provides separate CUDA Driver and Runtime APIs. The two APIs have significant overlap in functionality:
```

Author: Updated

* Both APIs support events, streams, memory management, memory copy, and error handling.
* Both APIs deliver similar performance.

> * Driver APIs calls begin with the prefix ``cu`` while Runtime APIs begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API contains ``cuEventCreate`` while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, with similar functionality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Driver API calls begin with the prefix ``cu`` while Runtime API calls begin with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the Driver API contains ``cuEventCreate`` while the Runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, with similar functionality.
```

Author: Updated

> * The Driver API defines a different, but largely overlapping, error code space than the Runtime API, and uses a different coding convention. For example, the Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE`` while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The Driver API defines a different, but largely overlapping, error code space than the Runtime API and uses a different coding convention. For example, the Driver API defines ``CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE`` while the Runtime API defines ``cudaErrorInvalidValue``.
```

Author: Updated

> The Driver API offers two additional pieces of functionality not provided by the Runtime API: ``cuModule`` and ``cuCtx`` APIs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Driver API offers two additional functionalities not provided by the Runtime API: ``cuModule`` and ``cuCtx`` APIs.

These functionalities are further discussed in the following sections.
```

Author: Updated

> ``<hip/hip_runtime_api.h>``

Reviewer 4: Why is this here? Can we remove it? Or else provide an explanation what this means?

Author: Removed.

> ``cuModule`` API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cuModule API
```

Author: Updated

----------------

The Module section of the Driver API provides additional control over how and when accelerator code objects are loaded.
For example, the driver API allows code objects to be loaded from files or memory pointers.
Symbols for kernels or global data can be extracted from the loaded code objects.
In contrast, the Runtime API automatically loads and -- if necessary -- compiles all of the kernels from an executable binary when run.

> In this mode, NVCC must be used to compile kernel code so the automatic loading can function correctly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Module section of the Driver API provides additional control over how and when accelerator code objects are loaded. For example, the driver API allows code objects to load from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or global data are extracted from the loaded code objects. In contrast, the Runtime API loads automatically and compiles all the kernels from an executable binary when run, if necessary. In this mode, kernel code must be compiled using NVCC so that the automatic loading functions correctly.
```

Author: Updated

Both Driver and Runtime APIs define a function for launching kernels, called ``cuLaunchKernel`` or ``cudaLaunchKernel``.
The kernel arguments and the execution configuration (grid dimensions, group dimensions, dynamic shared memory, and stream) are passed as arguments to the launch function.
The Runtime additionally provides the ``<<< >>>`` syntax for launching kernels, which resembles a special function call and is easier to use than explicit launch API, in particular with respect to handling of kernel arguments.

> However, this syntax is not standard C++ and is available only when NVCC is used to compile the host code.

Reviewer 4: This paragraph should have a separate section. Is it a part of cuModule API? We have already stated that cuModule is not provided by the Runtime API while cuLaunchKErnel is provided by both. Please confirm if this paragraph should be moved out of cuModule API?

Author: Yes, confirmed.

The content is moved to Using ``hipModuleLaunchKernel`` section.

The Module features are useful in an environment which generates the code objects directly, such as a new accelerator language front-end.
Here, NVCC is not used. Instead, the environment may have a different kernel language or different compilation flow.
Other environments have many kernels and do not want them to be all loaded automatically.
The Module functions can be used to load the generated code objects and launch kernels.

> As we will see below, HIP defines a Module API which provides similar explicit control over code object management.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Module features are useful in an environment that generates the code objects directly, such as a new accelerator language front-end. Here, NVCC is not used. Instead, the environment might have a different kernel language or compilation flow. Other environments have many kernels and don't want all of them to be loaded automatically. The Module functions load the generated code objects and launch kernels. Similar to the cuModule API, HIP defines hipModule API that provides similar explicit control over code object management.
```

Author: Updated.

> ``cuCtx`` API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cuCtx API
```

Author: Updated

-------------

The Driver API defines "Context" and "Devices" as separate entities.
Contexts contain a single device, and a device can theoretically have multiple contexts.
Each context contains a set of streams and events specific to the context.

> Historically contexts also defined a unique address space for the GPU, though this may no longer be the case in Unified Memory platforms, since the CPU and all the devices in the same process share a single unified address space.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, contexts also defined a unique address space for the GPU. This might no longer be the case in unified memory platforms, because the CPU and all the devices in the same process share a single unified address space.
```

Author: Updated

> The Context APIs also provide a mechanism to switch between devices, which allowed a single CPU thread to send commands to different GPUs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Context APIs also provide a mechanism to switch between devices, which enables a single CPU thread to send commands to different GPUs.
```

Author: Updated

> HIP as well as recent versions of the CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this feat - for example using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP and recent versions of the CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this feat, for example, using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.
```

Author: Updated

> The CUDA Runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the APIs and has little loss of functionality since each Context can contain a single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts have been replaced with other interfaces.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The CUDA Runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the APIs and has little loss of functionality. This is because each context can contain a single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts have been replaced with other interfaces.
```

Author: Updated

> HIP provides a context API to facilitate easy porting from existing Driver codes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP provides a Context API to facilitate easy porting from existing Driver code.
```

Author: Updated

In HIP, the ``Ctx`` functions largely provide an alternate syntax for changing the active device.

> Most new applications will prefer to use ``hipSetDevice`` or the stream APIs, therefore HIP has marked the ``hipCtx`` APIs as **deprecated**. Support for these APIs may not be available in future releases. For more details on deprecated APIs please refer :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most new applications preferentially use ``hipSetDevice`` or the stream APIs. Therefore, HIP has marked the ``hipCtx`` APIs as **deprecated**. Support for these APIs might not be available in future releases. For more details on deprecated APIs, see :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.
```

Author: Updated

> HIP Module and ``Ctx`` APIs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP module and Ctx APIs
```

===========================

> Rather than present two separate APIs, HIP extends the HIP API with new APIs for Modules and ``Ctx`` control.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rather than present two separate APIs, HIP extends the HIP API with new APIs for modules and ``Ctx`` control.
```

Author: Updated

> ``hipModule`` API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
hipModule API
```

Author: Updated

-----------------

Like the CUDA Driver API, the Module API provides additional control over how code is loaded, including options to load code from files or from in-memory pointers.

> NVCC and HIP-Clang target different architectures and use different code object formats: NVCC supports ``cubin`` or ``ptx`` files, while the HIP-Clang path is the ``hsaco`` format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NVCC and HIP-Clang target different architectures and use different code object formats. NVCC supports ``cubin`` or ``ptx`` files, while the HIP-Clang path uses the ``hsaco`` format.
```

Author: Updated

The external compilers which generate these code objects are responsible for generating and loading the correct code object for each platform.

> Notably, there is not a fat binary format that can contain code for both NVCC and HIP-Clang platforms. The following table summarizes the formats used on each platform:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notably, there is no fat binary format that can contain code for both NVCC and HIP-Clang platforms. The following table summarizes the formats used on each platform:
```

Author: Updated

.. list-table:: Module formats
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Format
     - APIs
     - NVCC
     - HIP-CLANG

>    * - Code Object

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * - Code object
```

Author: Updated

     - ``hipModuleLoad``, ``hipModuleLoadData``
     - ``.cubin`` or PTX text
     - ``.hsaco``

>    * - Fat Binary

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * - Fat binary
```

     - ``hipModuleLoadFatBin``
     - ``.fatbin``
     - ``.hip_fatbin``

> ``hipcc`` uses HIP-Clang or NVCC to compile host code. Both of these may embed code objects into the final executable, and these code objects will be automatically loaded when the application starts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``hipcc`` uses HIP-Clang or NVCC to compile host code. Both of these compilers can embed code objects into the final executable. These code objects are automatically loaded when the application starts.
```

Author: Updated

> The ``hipModule`` API can be used to load additional code objects, and in this way provides an extended capability to the automatically loaded code objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``hipModule`` API can be used to load additional code objects. When used this way, it extends the capability of the automatically loaded code objects.
```

Reviewer 3: I'm a bit confused about what "in this way provides an extended capability to the automatically loaded code object" means. If my understanding of the sentence isn't correct, please re-edit it so it's more accurate.

Author: Thanks! Updated.

> HIP-Clang allows both of these capabilities to be used together, if desired. Of course it is possible to create a program with no kernels and thus no automatic loading.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang enables both of these capabilities to be used together. Of course, it is possible to create a program with no kernels and no automatic loading.
```

Author: Updated

> ``hipCtx`` API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
hipCtx API
```

Author: Updated

--------------

> HIP provides a ``Ctx`` API as a thin layer over the existing Device functions. This ``Ctx`` API can be used to set the current context, or to query properties of the device associated with the context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP provides a ``Ctx`` API as a thin layer over the existing device functions. The ``Ctx`` API can be used to set the current context or to query properties of the device associated with the context.
```

Author: Updated

> The current context is implicitly used by other APIs such as ``hipStreamCreate``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current context is implicitly used by other APIs, such as ``hipStreamCreate``.
```

HIPIFY translation of CUDA Driver API
-------------------------------------

> The HIPIFY tools convert CUDA Driver APIs for streams, events, modules, devices, memory management, context, profiler to the equivalent HIP calls. For example, ``cuEventCreate`` will be translated to ``hipEventCreate``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The HIPIFY tools convert CUDA Driver APIs for streams, events, modules, devices, memory management, context, and the profiler to the equivalent HIP calls. For example, ``cuEventCreate`` is translated to ``hipEventCreate``.
```

Author: updated

> HIPIFY tools also convert error codes from the Driver namespace and coding convention to the equivalent HIP error code. Thus, HIP unifies the APIs for these common functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIPIFY tools also convert error codes from the Driver namespace and coding conventions to the equivalent HIP error code. HIP unifies the APIs for these common functions.
```

Author: Updated

> The memory copy API requires additional explanation. The CUDA driver includes the memory direction in the name of the API (``cuMemcpyH2D``) while the CUDA driver API provides a single memory copy API with a parameter that specifies the direction and additionally supports a "default" direction where the runtime determines the direction automatically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The memory copy API requires additional explanation. The CUDA driver includes the memory direction in the name of the API (``cuMemcpyH2D``), while the CUDA driver API provides a single memory copy API with a parameter that specifies the direction. It also supports a "default" direction where the runtime determines the direction automatically.
```

Author: Updated

HIP provides APIs with both styles: for example, ``hipMemcpyH2D`` as well as ``hipMemcpy``.

> The first flavor may be faster in some cases since they avoid host overhead to detect the different memory directions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP provides APIs with both styles, for example, ``hipMemcpyH2D`` as well as ``hipMemcpy``.
The first version might be faster in some cases since it avoids any host overhead to detect the different memory directions.
```

Author: Updated

> HIP defines a single error space, and uses camel-case for all errors (i.e. ``hipErrorInvalidValue``).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP defines a single error space and uses camel case for all errors (i.e. ``hipErrorInvalidValue``).
```

Author: Updated

For further information, visit the :doc:`hipify:index`.

> Address Spaces

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Address spaces
```

Reviewer 3: I think this header is missing in the preview. Several headers that are present in this file don't show up in the RTD preview. I'm not sure if this is a preview problem or something with the markup.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HIP-Clang defines a process-wide address space where the CPU and all devices allocate addresses from a single unified pool.

> Thus addresses may be shared between contexts, and unlike the original CUDA definition a new context does not create a new address space for the device.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means addresses can be shared between contexts. Unlike the original CUDA implementation, a new context does not create a new address space for the device.
```

> Using ``hipModuleLaunchKernel``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using hipModuleLaunchKernel
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> ``hipModuleLaunchKernel`` is ``cuLaunchKernel`` in HIP world. It takes the same arguments as ``cuLaunchKernel``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``hipModuleLaunchKernel`` in HIP is equivalent to ``cuLaunchKernel`` in CUDA. It takes the same arguments as ``cuLaunchKernel``.
```

Reviewer 3: I think the first sentence, as written, can be confusing. Is my understanding of it correct? If not, make any necessary adjustments so it's accurate.

Author: It's replaced by the hipModuleLaunchKernel that was in the previous section, part of cuModule

> Additional Information

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional information
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> HIP-Clang creates a primary context when the HIP API is called. So in a pure driver API code, HIP-Clang will create a primary context while HIP/NVCC will have an empty context stack. HIP-Clang will push primary context to the context stack when it is empty. This can have subtle differences on applications which mix the runtime and driver APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang creates a primary context when the HIP API is called. So, in pure driver API code, HIP-Clang creates a primary context while HIP/NVCC has an empty context stack. HIP-Clang pushes the primary context to the context stack when it is empty. This can lead to subtle differences in applications which mix the runtime and driver APIs.
```

> ``hip-clang`` Implementation Notes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
hip-clang implementation notes
```

----------------------------------
 

> ``.hip_fatbin``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.hip_fatbin
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> hip-clang links device code from different translation units together. For each device target, a code object is generated. Code objects for different device targets are bundled by ``clang-offload-bundler`` as one fatbinary, which is embedded as a global symbol ``__hip_fatbin`` in the ``.hip_fatbin`` section of the ELF file of the executable or shared object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang links device code from different translation units together. For each device target, it generates a code object. ``clang-offload-bundler`` bundles code objects for different device targets into one fat binary, which is embedded as the global symbol ``__hip_fatbin`` in the ``.hip_fatbin`` section of the ELF file of the executable or shared object.
```

Reviewer 3: I wasn't sure whether hip-clang referred to the application (in which case it's HIP-Clang) or the executable (which should be ``hip-clang`` in code ticks) in this section. Please correct as required.

Author: Thanks! Updated.

> Initialization and Termination Functions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initialization and termination functions
```

Reviewer 3: I don't see this title in the preview

Reviewer 2: Fixed the title.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> hip-clang generates initialization and termination functions for each translation unit for host code compilation. The initialization functions call ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` to register the fatbinary embedded in the ELF file. They also call ``__hipRegisterFunction`` and ``__hipRegisterVar`` to register kernel functions and device side global variables. The termination functions call ``__hipUnregisterFatBinary``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang generates initialization and termination functions for each translation unit for host code compilation. The initialization functions call ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` to register the fat binary embedded in the ELF file. They also call ``__hipRegisterFunction`` and ``__hipRegisterVar`` to register kernel functions and device-side global variables. The termination functions call ``__hipUnregisterFatBinary``.
```

Author: Updated

> hip-clang emits a global variable ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` of ``void**`` type with ``linkonce`` linkage and initial value 0 for each host translation unit. Each initialization function checks ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` and register the fatbinary only if ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` is 0 and saves the return value of ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` to ``__hip_gpubin_handle``. This is to guarantee that the fatbinary is only registered once. Similar check is done in the termination functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang emits a global variable ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` of type ``void**`` with ``linkonce`` linkage and an initial value of 0 for each host translation unit. Each initialization function checks ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` and registers the fat binary only if ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` is 0. It saves the return value of ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` to ``__hip_gpubin_handle``. This is to guarantee that the fat binary is only registered once. A similar check is performed in the termination functions.
```

> Kernel Launching

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kernel launching
```

Reviewer 3: This title doesn't seem to show up in the preview

Reviewer 2: Fixed the title.
